---
layout: post
title: "Research Statistics: Spring 2020"
thumbnail: "assets/img/spr2020stats/thumbnail.png"
---


I'm a big believer in personal organization, and particularly in the value of
keeping logs. Personal logging, or journaling, is, of course, not a new
phenomenon; for centuries people have kept logs of their days in order to gain
perspective, understand their emotions, and leave a record of their thoughts
for posterity---or even themselves, at a later date. My journals tend to give a
 sense of my tendency to over-organize. 

<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/journal.jpeg" alt="Pages from personal journal"/>

## Why Keep a Research Log?

In a research context, logging can be less common. There are some fields, such
as biology, in which strict standards for research logs have been established
and taught, but in computer science this instruction is not standardized. If
not for my advisor's urging, I might not have ever started keeping research
logs. Having now kept consistent research logs for three years, I can
confidently say that they are an invaluable tool for keeping track of
experiments, recalling the broader purposes of a project, and remembering the
work that I have done over a specific period. With some additional
record-keeping, they can also become a way to analyze trends in the kinds of
work that you're doing, and to improve time management. 

<div class="row">
    <img class="img-fluid col-lg-6" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/research_log_1.png" alt="Screenshot from the beginning of my research log"/>
    <img class="img-fluid col-lg-6" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/research_log_2.png" alt="Screenshot from further down in the research log"/>
</div>

The simplest way to keep a research log is to use something like Google Docs.
For my purposes, a research log needs to have two things: a way to record a
unit of work done on a particular day, and a way of categorizing those units of
work. It should also be accessible from any computer, since I end up using a
number of different computers in my research and its a good idea to make
recording research activities as easy as possible. I use color-coding to
categorize, but certainly more sophisticated tagging tools exist in other
products like Airtable. What is attractive to me about Google Docs is the
flexibility of a word document-based log; each recorded unit of work can
stretch as long as I need it to, with any number of sub-bullets, without coming
up against the constraints of a spreadsheet-based logging tool. In any case,
the main thing is to optimize for ease of recording activities---analyzing your
logs, as I will go on to do in the rest of this post, can take as long as it
needs to because it's done infrequently.

At regular intervals---I choose the end of each semester---it's a good idea to
pause, compile statistics from the current research log, and begin a new one.
This is a good idea for several reasons: (1) It's helpful and good for your
mental health to periodically read back over your log to remember what you've
done (chances are good that it's more than you think); (2) Having separate
documents for different time periods makes it easier to find a specific date
range later on; (3) Google Docs doesn't deal well with long documents---I see
significant slowdowns if a research log gets longer than twenty pages.

<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/research_stats.png" alt="Screenshot from research stats spreadsheet"/>

Compiling statistics at regular intervals also gives you the opportunity to
compare, for example, research activities in Spring 2020 to research activities
in Spring 2019. Were you more or less productive last year? Are you still doing
enough reading as you progress in your research? Did you remember to take
enough days off to relax? These are all questions that research log statistics
can help you to answer. To actually compile the statistics, I just used Google
Sheets. I then downloaded the resulting spreadsheet as a CSV to do the plotting
that follows. I used R to generate these plots, but any programming language
(or spreadsheet software) will have equivalent capabilities. 

## Spring 2020

Spring 2020 was a weird semester, as I'm sure I don't need to remind anyone.
Because of that, one might reasonably expect that my productivity went down.
And, more generally, because these are statistics generated from subjective
units of work as self-reported by me, one might expect that they are not
particularly consistent or reliable. Surprisingly, however, there are
remarkable consistencies and trends that can be observed in the data that I've
collected over the past two years[^1]. I've previously analyzed some of this
data [on Twitter](https://twitter.com/wcannontwo/status/1214248302813818881),
so I will mainly be focusing here on the trends that Spring 2020 highlights.
They are, of course, inherently personal, and I will try to avoid
over-generalizing. I encourage anyone to analyze their own logs and
share the results; maybe there are certain aspects of our self-reported
productivity that are common across people.


#### Spring 2020 Plots
<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/spr2020stats.png" alt="Spring 2020 trends plot"/>
<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/spr2020stats_stacked_dot.png" alt="Spring 2020 stacked dot plot"/>


It's only really appropriate to compare statistics from Spring 2020 with
statistics from Spring 2019, because I have different responsibilities in the
Fall and in the Spring. In the Fall I'm usually spending a lot of time writing
fellowship applications and TAing, but in the Spring my attention is focused
more directly on research. The plots above display these statistics in two
different forms: separate line plots of the number of units of work in five
different categories that I accomplished over the semester, and a stacked dot
plot showing the total distribution of work throughout the semester. In the
line plots, the vertical gray bars indicate "days off", during which I recorded no
research work units. 

Let's first discuss trends within the data from Spring 2020. There's an
interesting 'm'-shaped trend to the total units of work graph, which could be
attributed to either of two obvious explanations. The first is that I began
working from home in response to the coronavirus in late February 2020, and so
the decrease in productivity that began around that time might be directly
related to that decision. The resumption in productivity in mid-March might
then be the result of my adjusting to the different work environment and
heightened level of stress. An alternative explanation arises if we examine the
pattern of days off during this semester---from this perspective, it appears
that decreases in productivity are preceded by periods of relatively few days
off, whereas the uptick of productivity in mid-March is preceded by a four-day
break that I took. This explanation is somewhat undercut by the similar-looking
trend in the meetings plot, which suggests that there was a reduction in my
overall productivity associated with a reduction in meetings. Since the number
of meetings that I have per week is not really under my control but *was*
affected by quarantine, the coronavirus explanation is the more likely one for
this 'm'-shaped trend. 

Apart from the 'm'-shaped trend, I did more research and reading at the
beginning of Spring 2020 than at the end. This is because I got reviews back on
a rejected paper in February and began rewriting it. A corresponding increase
in the number of writing work units later in the semester confirms this.
There's also a noticeable decrease in the number of miscellaneous work units as
the semester goes on, but I think that this is attributable to the work from
home situation. Not being in my office and with most events cancelled, I have
many fewer small administrative and extracurricular activities to take care of. 

#### Spring 2019 Plots
<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/spr2019stats.png" alt="Spring 2019 trends plot"/>
<img class="img-fluid" src="{{ site.url }}/assets/img/spr2020stats/spr2019stats_stacked_dot.png" alt="Spring 2019 stacked dot plot"/>

Now, let's compare with Spring 2019. The scale on these graphs is slightly
different, but we can still observe some similarities and differences with
Spring 2020. First, there's again a decrease in total work units following a
period without many days off beginning in late March. Since there was no
quarantine in Spring 2019, we might infer that failing to take days off does
indeed affect overall productivity. Ultimately, we can't draw any concrete
conclusions from these two semesters' data alone---but I think that I can
comfortably say that it's important to take time to rest during a PhD. Second,
it's interesting that my research and reading effort was more clustered around
the middle of the semester in Spring 2019, rather than being clustered at the
beginning and end as in Spring 2020. I also did less writing in Spring 2019;
perhaps one has to do with the other? Writing is certainly time-consuming and
mentally draining. Finally, it's comforting to see that the average number of
meetings and miscellaneous items that I do per day hasn't changed dramatically
from Spring 2019 to Spring 2020---this suggests that I'm successfully avoiding
bureaucracy creep in my day-to-day research activities. 

I want to point out one final aspect of this data that isn't reflected in the
plots above, but which has been the most surprising aspect of doing this
analysis each semester. From the data in my research logs, I can calculate the
number of days off---defined as days in which I recorded no work units in my
research log---for each semester. The fascinating thing about this number is
that it is utterly consistent from Fall 2018 to Spring 2020. Despite the fact
that I don't always take weekends off, and factoring in vacations from school,
each of these four semesters I have taken either 26 or 27 days off. The spooky
thing about this number is that it corresponds to roughly the number of
weekend days in a Rice semester, which consists of fourteen weeks. Without
getting too speculative about it, this seems to me to be evidence that the
five-day work week is somehow ingrained in my psyche. Even when I don't
consciously intend it, my behavior on average reinforces that standard pattern
of work. Is this a cultural effect, or does it indicate an amount of necessary
rest that is fundamental to human pyschology? I have no idea.

To finish up here, I'd like to say that despite the fact that I'm calling these
"research statistics," what I'm seeking to do in this blog post really has very
little to do with formal statistics. Quantitative data about our habits can
help us to understand patterns that we might tend to forget, but at the end of
the day there's an essential qualitative aspect to being human. Nowhere
reported in these numbers are the crucial interactions with friends and family
members that have allowed me to stay sane during one of the most stressful
events in any of our lives. Compiling these statistics every semester is not an
exercise in data science; it's a useful reminder to slow down, reflect, and
consider whether I'm living my life according to the principles that I hold
dear. Don't let life pass you by unnoticed---keep some sort of log of your
time. In the last analysis, we have so little of it. 

[^1]: I didn't start categorizing entries in my research log until I started my PhD, in Fall 2018. As such, I don't have numbers from Fall 2017 and Spring 2018. 
